# GRSuite
A framework written in Julia which implements various methods in GR, numerical relativity and black hole perturbation theory, including computing geodesics, extreme-mass-ratio inspirals, and gravitational waveforms. The Examples.ipynb, which is best viewed [here](https://nbviewer.org/github/lennoxkeeble/GRSuite/blob/main/Examples.ipynb), demonstrates how the code can be used.

The code uses the methods desribed in detail in Ref. [1] to compute the constants of motion $(E, L, Q)$, which are the dimensionless forms of the energy, z-component of the angular momentum, and Carter's constant, from the constants $(a, p, e, θ_\text{min})$, which are the black hole's spin, the (bound) orbit's semi-latus rectum, eccentricity, and inclination (relative to the z-axis). Further, we implement the method described in Ref. [2] to compute semi-relativistic gravitational waveforms of bound orbits of test-particles, ignoring radiation-reaction effects. The code has the capability to do this both in Kerr, and more generic axisymmetric and stationary spacetimes. Finally, we implement the method described in Ref. [3] to compute fully-relativistc extreme-mass-ratio inspirals (EMRIs), taking into account the effect of the inspiralling compact object gravitationally interacting with itself. Currently, the code only has the capability to compute EMRIs in Kerr, but we expect to generalize this to more general axisymmetric and stationary spacetimes in the near future, though the increase in run-time of such a computation remains to be seen.

Last updated: 01.13.2024

## Components ##

* **Geodesics**: the modules located in the file <em>Kerr.jl</em> define various objects specific to Kerr spacetime, e.g., the Kerr metric, the two-rank killing tensor which generates the required symmetry for the third constant of motion $Q$, the Christoffel symbols, etc. Further,  <em>Kerr.jl</em> and <em>NumericalGeodesics.jl</em> contain code which numerically solves the geodesic equation in Kerr, and general axisymmetric and stationary spacetimes respectively.

* **Gravitational waveforms**: the file <em>KludgeWaveforms.jl</em> contains functions which compute the gravitational waveform of a particle's trajectory in some axisymmetric and stationary spacetime. Currently, it is limited to semi-relativistic waveforms which ignore radiation-reaction effects, but we expect to build an implementation for fully relativistic waveforms in the near future.

* **EMRIs**: the file <em>SelfForce.jl</em> contains code that computes the self-acceleration of an inspiralling compact object, and a master function which constructs the EMRI trajectory using the method in Ref. [3]. Essentially, the crux of the method is that the EMRI trajectory, which is not a geodesic, is constructed of many "small" pieces which are themselves geodesics tangent to the EMRI trajectory. This is possible because the time scale of radiation-reaction effects is much longer than the orbital periods (i.e., those related to the fundamental frequencies of the many geodesic pieces). The user specifies the number of points along the piecewise geodesics, at the end of which we calculate the average self-force along the entire piece, which is then used to update the geodesic equation. Currently, the functionality of this code is limited to computing just the inspiral and the self-acceleration. We expect to add capabilities to compute the evolution of the constants of motion in the near future.

* **Plotting**: the file <em>GRPlotLib.jl</em> contains useful code for making plots of trajectories, waveforms, and the effective potential. The functions are not at all robust, but serve to provide a starting point for some basic plots to interpret the solutions generated by the other modules in this package.  

## Dependencies ##

All the dependencies are located in the <em>dependencies.jl</em> file. Simply run <code> include("dependencies.jl")</code> to install all the necessary packages

## Limitations and known possible performance bottlenecks ##

* This code has only been tested on Mac OS.
* Further tests assessing the accuracy of the EMRI trajectory are to be carried out. For example, we take very high order numerical derivatives of the multipole moments, and we have not yet systematially determined the accuracy with which we are doing so. Note that this differs from the approach in Ref. [3], wherein they use the separability of the Hamilton-Jacobi equations in Kerr to fit the derivatives to a complex fourier series expansion in terms of the fundamental frequencies. Unfortunately, there is not yet a robust capability in Julia which allows fitting with complex parameters. As such, we have, for now, instead opted for numerical differentation to obtain the higher order derivatives of the multiplole moments.
* Currently, the code can only compute EMRIs in Kerr, though we expect to generalize this to more general axisymmetric and stationary spacetimes in the near future.

## Authors ##

- Lennox Keeble
- Alejandro Cardenas-Avendano 

## References ##
[1] Schmidt, W. Celestial mechanics in Kerr spacetime. [arXiv:gr-qc/0202090](https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0202090)

[2] Babak, S., et al. "Kludge" gravitational waveforms for a test-body orbiting a Kerr black hole. [arXiv:gr-qc/0607007v2](https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0607007v2)

[3] Sopuerta, C., & Yunes, N. New Kludge Scheme for the Construction of Approximate Waveforms for Extreme-Mass-Ratio Inspirals. [arXiv:1109.0572](https://arxiv.org/abs/1109.0572)

## MIT License

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this 
software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software 
without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, 
publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit 
persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies 
or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE 
FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, 
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN 
THE SOFTWARE.
